gatvā sāndīpanimatha catuṣṣaṣṭimātrairahobhi:
sarvajñastvaṃ saha musalinā sarvavidyā gṛhītvā |
putraṃ naṣṭaṃ yamanilayanādāhṛtaṃ dakṣiṇārthaṃ
datvā tasmai nijapuramagā nādayan pāñcajanyam ||1||
gatvā sāndīpanim-atha	going to the sage Saandipani, then
catu:-ṣaṣṭi-mātrai:-ahobhi:	in 64 days only
sarvajña:-tvaṃ	Omniscient Thou
saha musalinā	along with Balaraama
sarva-vidyā gṛhītvā	all knowledge mastering
putraṃ naṣṭaṃ	the dead son
yama-nilayanāt-āhṛtaṃ	from Yama's abode bringing
dakṣiṇā-arthaṃ	by way of dakshinaa (to the teacher Sandipini)
datvā tasmai	giving him
nija-puram-agā	to Thy city went back
nādayan pāñcajanyam	sounding the conch Paanchajanya
Along with Balaraama Thou went to sage Sandipani's aashram and mastered all knowledge in just 64 days. Thou brought back Thy guru Sandipani's dead son from Yama's abode and gave him by way of Guru-dakshinaa. Thou then went back to Thy city sounding the conch Paanchajanya.
smṛtvā smṛtvā paśupasudṛśa: premabhārapraṇunnā:
kāruṇyena tvamapi vivaśa: prāhiṇoruddhavaṃ tam |
kiñcāmuṣmai paramasuhṛde bhaktavaryāya tāsāṃ
bhaktyudrekaṃ sakalabhuvane durlabhaṃ darśayiṣyan ||2||
smṛtvā smṛtvā	remembering again and again
paśupa-sudṛśa:	the beautiful Gopikas
prema-bhāra-praṇunnā:	who were overwhelmed with love for Thee
kāruṇyena	with compassion
tvam-api vivaśa:	Thou also were overcome
prāhiṇo:-uddhavaṃ tam	(Thou) sent that Uddhava
kim-ca-amuṣmai	and besides to him
parama-suhṛde	(Thy) very dear friend
bhaktavaryāya tāsāṃ	those great devotees
bhakti-udrekaṃ	intense devotion
skala-bhuvane durlabhaṃ	rare in the whole world
darśayiṣyan	wishing to show
Again and again Thou remembered the overwhelming love of the beautiful Gopikas for Thee. Thou were also overpowered with compassion for them. Thou sent Thy very dear friend Uddhava to them with a message. Also with the desire to demonstrate to him the intense devotion of those great devotees which was rare in the whole world.
tvanmāhātmyaprathimapiśunaṃ gokulaṃ prāpya sāyaṃ
tvadvārtābhirbahu sa ramayāmāsa nandaṃ yaśodām |
prātarddṛṣṭvā maṇimayarathaṃ śaṅkitā: paṅkajākṣya:
śrutvā prāptaṃ bhavadanucaraṃ tyaktakāryā: samīyu: ||3||
tvat-māhātmya-	Thy greatness (and)
prathima-piśunaṃ	magnitude indicating
gokulaṃ prāpya sāyaṃ	to Gokula reaching in the evening
tvat-vārtābhi:-bahu	with Thy many news
sa ramayāmāsa	he (Uddhava) delighted
nandaṃ yaśodām	Nanda and Yashodaa
prāta:-dṛṣṭvā	in the morning seeing
maṇimaya-rathaṃ	the bejewelled chariot
śaṅkitā: paṅkajākṣya:	suspecting, the lotus eyed women
śrutvā prāptaṃ	hearing (that) had come
bhavat-anucaraṃ	Thy emissary (follower)
tyakta-kāryā:	abandoning their work
samīyu:	gathered
Gokula's prosperity was an indication of the magnitude of Thy greatness. Reaching there in the evening, Uddhava delighted Nanda and Yashodaa with Thy many news. In the morning the lotus eyed women of Gokula saw the bejewelled chariot and suspected Thy arrival. They came to know that one of Thy emissaries had come. Abandoning their work, they gathered at the house of Nandagopa.
dṛṣṭvā cainaṃ tvadupamalasadveṣabhūṣābhirāmaṃ
smṛtvā smṛtvā tava vilasitānyuccakaistāni tāni |
ruddhālāpā: kathamapi punargadgadāṃ vācamūcu:
saujanyādīn nijaparabhidāmapyalaṃ vismarantya: ||4||
dṛṣṭvā ca-enaṃ	and seeing him
tvat-upama-	similar to Thee
lasat-veṣa-bhūṣā-abhirāmaṃ	donning clothes and ornaments charming
smṛtvā smṛtvā	remembering again and again
tava vilasitāni-	Thy various deeds
uccakai:-tāni tāni	thoroughly all of them
ruddha-ālāpā:	choking for words
katham-api	somehow
puna:-gadgadāṃ	again with faltering
vācam-ūcu:	words spoke
saujanya-ādīn	behaviour etc.,
nija-para-bhidām-	self and others' difference
api-alaṃ	also completely
vismarantya:	forgetting
The Gopikas saw Uddhava donning charming clothes and ornaments similar to Thine. They remembered Thee again and again and Thy various deeds and sports very thoroughly. They were full of emotions and were choking for words, and somehow managed to speak to Uddhava with faltering words. They had forgotten to observe the norms of behaviour and courtesies, and the differences between themselves and others.
śrīmān kiṃ tvaṃ pitṛjanakṛte preṣito nirdayena
kvāsau kānto nagarasudṛśāṃ hā hare nātha pāyā: |
āśleṣāṇāmamṛtavapuṣo hanta te cumbanānā-
munmādānāṃ kuhakavacasāṃ vismaret kānta kā vā ||5||
śrīmān kiṃ tvaṃ	O Sir! Is it (that) you
pitṛjana-kṛte	for the sake of the parents
preṣita: nirdayena	are sent by the heart-less one
kva-asau kānta:	where is that (Krishna) beloved
nagara-sudṛśāṃ	of the city beauties
hā hare nātha pāyā:	O Hari! O Lord! protect us
āśleṣāṇām-	of the embraces
amṛta-vapuṣa:	of that nectarine form
hanta te	alas! Of Thee
cumbanānām	the kisses
unmādānāṃ	the intense love
kuhaka-vacasāṃ	and sly words
vismaret kānta	will forget O beloved
kā vā	which one (woman)
O Sir! Is it that you are sent by the heartless Krishna for the sake of his parents? Where is the beloved one of the beauties of the city? O Lord! O Hari! Protect us. Alas which one of us women can forget the embrace of the nectarine form, the kisses of intense love and the frolicsome words of the beloved one?'
rāsakrīḍālulitalalitaṃ viślathatkeśapāśaṃ
mandodbhinnaśramajalakaṇaṃ lobhanīyaṃ tvadaṅgam |
kāruṇyābdhe sakṛdapi samāliṅgituṃ darśayeti
premonmādādbhuvanamadana tvatpriyāstvāṃ vilepu: ||6||
rāsa-krīḍā	during the Raasa dance
lulita-lalitaṃ	which was done up, the beautiful
viślathat-keśa-pāśaṃ	dishevelled untied (loosened) hair
manda-udbhinna-	the slight appearance (of)
śramajala-kaṇaṃ	of the sweat drops due to exertion
lobhanīyaṃ tvat-aṅgam	enchanting Thy form
kāruṇya-abdhe	O Ocean of Compassion!
sakṛt-api	at least once
samāliṅgitum darśaya-	to embrace (kindly) show
iti prema-unmādāt-	thus out of intense love
bhuvanamadana	O Enchanter of all the worlds!
tvat-priyā:-	Thy dear ones
tvāṃ vilepu:	implored Thee
During the Raasa dance the done up beautiful hair which were dishevelled and had loosened, and with the appearance of sweat drops, Thy form was rendered enchanting. O Ocean of Compassion! Reveal to us once that form, so that we may once more embrace that form of Thee! O Enchanter of all the worlds!', thus Thy dear ones implored Thee out of intense love.
evaṃprāyairvivaśavacanairākulā gopikāstā-
stvatsandeśai: prakṛtimanayat so'tha vijñānagarbhai: |
bhūyastābhirmuditamatibhistvanmayībhirvadhūbhi-
stattadvārtāsarasamanayat kānicidvāsarāṇi ||7||
evaṃ-prāyai:-	of such kind
vivaśa-vacanai:-	of despairful words
ākulā: gopikā:-tā:-	overwhelmed with grief, those Gopikaas
tvat-sandeśai:	with Thy messages (of deep knowledge)
prakṛtim-anayat	came to their own selves (became normal)
sa:-atha	he (Uddhava) then
vijñāna-garbhai:	with knowledge of self full of
bhūya:-	thereafter
tābhi:-muditamatibhi:-	with them who were delighted
tvat-mayībhi:-vadhūbhi:-	and who were absorbed in Thee, with (those) women
tat-tat-vārtā-	all those tales
sarasam-anayat	happily narrating spent
kānicit-vāsarāṇi	some days
The Gopikas bemoaned their fate with such words of despair and were overwhelmed with grief. Uddhava comforted them with Thy message of deep spiritual import. They came to their normal selves and thereafter experienced Thy inner presence. Uddhava spent some days with the totally devoted Gopikas joyfully and happily narrating various incidents about Thee.
tvatprodgānai: sahitamaniśaṃ sarvato gehakṛtyaṃ
tvadvārtaiva prasarati mitha: saiva cotsvāpalāpā: |
ceṣṭā: prāyastvadanukṛtayastvanmayaṃ sarvamevaṃ
dṛṣṭvā tatra vyamuhadadhikaṃ vismayāduddhavo'yam ||8||
tvat-prodgānai: sahitam-	with songs about Thee
aniśaṃ sarvata:	always everywhere
geha-kṛtyaṃ	household chores
tvat-vārtā-eva	Thy tale alone
prasarati	goes on
mitha: sā-eva	amongst them that alone
ca-utsva-apalāpā:	in dreams speaking
ceṣṭā: prāya:-	actions mostly
tvat-anukṛtaya:-	were Thy imitations
tvat-mayaṃ	Thyself personified
sarvam-evaṃ	everything altogether
dṛṣṭvā tatra	seeing there
vyamuhat-adhikaṃ	was stunned very greatly
vismayāt-uddhava:-ayam	with wonder.that Uddhava
The Gopikas always sang songs about Thee. Everywhere while doing their household chores, they narrated Thine tales, amongst themselves. They even spoke about Thee in their dreams.Their actions were mostly imitations of Thy actions as they tried to personify Thee. Everything that there, was permeated by Thy presence. Observing all this that great devotee Uddhava was wonderstruck and left stunned.
rādhāyā me priyatamamidaṃ matpriyaivaṃ bravīti
tvaṃ kiṃ maunaṃ kalayasi sakhe māninīmatpriyeva|
ityādyeva pravadati sakhi tvatpriyo nirjane mā-
mitthaṃvādairaramadayaṃ tvatpriyāmutpalākṣīm ||9||
rādhāyā: me	for Raadhaa of Mine
priyatamam-idaṃ	this is the favourite
mat-priyā-evaṃ bravīti	my dear one speaks like this
tvaṃ kiṃ maunaṃ kalayasi	you are why silence maintaining
sakhe	Oh! Friend
māninī-mat-priyā-iva	like my dear and proud one (Raadhaa)
iti-ādi-eva	in this way only
pravadati sakhi	says O friend (Raadhaa)
tvat-priya:	your beloved (Krishna)
nirjane mām-	when alone, to me
itthaṃ-vādai:-	with such words
aramat-ayaṃ	gladdened he (Uddhava)
tvat-priyām-	Thy dear one (Raadhaa)
utpala-ākṣīm	the lotus eyed
This is my Raadhaa's favourite. My dear one speaks like this. My dear friend! Why are you silent like my dear proud one (Raadhaa)?' 'In this way O dear friend (Raadhaa) your beloved (Krishna) speaks to me when we are alone.' With these words Uddhava gladdened Thy dear lotus eyed Raadhaa.
eṣyāmi drāganupagamanaṃ kevalaṃ kāryabhārā-
dviśleṣe'pi smaraṇadṛḍhatāsambhavānmāstu kheda: |
brahmānande milati nacirāt saṅgamo vā viyoga-
stulyo va: syāditi tava girā so'karonnirvyathāstā: ||10||
eṣyāmi drāk-	I will come soon
anupagamanaṃ	(my) not coming is
kevalaṃ kāryabhārāt-	only due to work pressure
viśleṣe-api	in separation also
smaraṇa-dṛḍhatā-sambhavāt-	because of firm remembrance
mā-astu kheda:	let there be no grief
brahmānande milati	when Brahmaananda is attained
na-cirāt	without long (soon)
saṅgama: vā viyoga:-	meeting or separation
tulya: va: syāt-	same for you will be
iti tava girā	thus by Thy words
sa:-akarot-	he made
nirvyathā:-tā:	them free of sorrow
I shall come soon. My not coming is only due to work pressure. When there is firm remembrance, in separation also there is no grief. Before long when Brahmaananda is attained, you will experience the separation and union equally blissful.' By such words of Thine Uddhava appeased them.
evaṃ bhakti sakalabhuvane nekṣitā na śrutā vā
kiṃ śāstraughai: kimiha tapasā gopikābhyo namo'stu |
ityānandākulamupagataṃ gokulāduddhavaṃ taṃ
dṛṣṭvā hṛṣṭo gurupurapate pāhi māmāmayaughāt ||11||
evaṃ bhakti:	such devotion
sakala-bhuvane	in the whole world
na-īkṣitā	is not seen
na śrutā vā	or is not heard of
kiṃ śāstra-aughai:	of what use are so many scriptures
kim-iha tapasā	of what use here is penance
gopikābhya: nama:-astu	for the Gopikaasa may there be salutations
iti-ādi-	thus and so
ānanda-ākulam-	overwhelmed with joy
upagataṃ gokulāt-	who had returned from Gokula
uddhavaṃ taṃ	that Uddhava
dṛṣṭvā hṛṣṭa:	seeing, very happy (Thou)
gurupurapate pāhi	O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me
mām-āmaya-aughāt	from my so many afflictions
Such devotion is neither seen nor heard of in the whole world. Of what use is the study of so many scriptures and the practices there in. And what is the use here of all penances. May there be salutations to the Gopikaas.' Thus Uddhava joyfully exclaimed when he returned from Gokula and met Thee. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who were happy to see Uddhava, save me from so many of my afflictions.